a

I am trying to give a nuanced answer to your question. Let me give you an example, what would be your answer if I ask: "Does English have words that start with 'kn' sound?" Of course, there are no modern English words that start with 'kn' sound. But was this always the case? No, Old English most probably had plenty of words that had 'kn' sound in the beginning. So, the nuanced answer cannot be a simple yes or no, because Old English is still English, speakers of Old English did not call their language Old English, for them it was simply English.

Similarly, does modern day Ho have words with 'H' in the middle of words? No. Was this always the case? No, old Munda most certainly had a 'H' or 'H'-like sound ('K/KH') in numerous words, let's use a placeholder 'x' for this sound. Examples include: Baxa (flower, pkaa in Khmer, Baha in Santali), Caxan (firewood, cakhan in Korku, Sahan in Santali), roxoṛo (dry, lokhor in Korku, rohoṛ in Santali), Xanxar (father-in-law, Kaṅkar in Korku, Hanhar in Santali), Joxa (cheek, Joka in Korku, Joha in Santali).

Please consider clearing these questions:
What are you referring to when you say Ho language? I'm talking about a technical definition, like, the geographical location and the time period when this language is spoken (something like, "the language spoken in and around West Singhbhum from starting from 1820 till today"). I'm asking this because I want to know which century or year you have taken as a cutoff for your definition of the Ho language. This will make clear whether you look at it as some isolated language or as part of a language family with historical roots.




Raimul Bandra 
I'm trying to give a nuanced answer to your question. Let me give you an example, what would be your answer if asked: "Does English have words that start with 'kn' sound?" Of course, there are no modern English words that start with 'kn' sound. But was this always the case? No, Old English most probably had plenty of words that began with 'kn' sound. So, the nuanced answer cannot be a simple yes or no, because Old English is still English, speakers of Old English did not call their language Old English, for them it was simply English.

Similarly, does modern day Ho have words with 'H' in the middle of words? No. Was this always the case? No, old Munda most certainly had a 'H' or 'H'-like sound ('K/KH') in numerous words, let's use a placeholder 'x' for this sound. Examples include: Baxa (flower, pkaa in Khmer, Baha in Santali), Caxan (firewood, cakhan in Korku, Sahan in Santali), roxoṛo (dry, lokhor in Korku, rohoṛ in Santali), Xanxar (father-in-law, Kaṅkar in Korku, Hanhar in Santali), Joxa (cheek, Joka in Korku, Joha in Santali). To Deeney, Ho language is what he heard in Singbhum 1949 onwards till his demise. Please give a good reason as to why Deeney's definition of 

It boils down to what you perceive Ho language to be. Please consider clearing these questions:
What are you referring to when you say Ho language? I'm talking about a technical definition, like, the geographical location and the time period when this language is/was spoken (something like, "the language spoken in and around West Singhbhum starting in the year 1820 till today"). I'm asking this because I want to understand which century or year you've taken as a cutoff for your definition of the Ho language. This will make clear whether you look at it as an isolated language devoid of linguistic history or as part of a larger language family with historical roots. One might see Ho to be a language that came into being in the 10th century, another might find it's roots in 5 BCE. The point is, not everyone has to agree on your definition of the Ho language.


chotoraeme bu menea nahk do

metdak tungi eana, dak tungi akana kaa harri tana

nenado ambak kaa

ajn ambak redo kanj kajiea honang

=======================
Background
Megh Parab can be celebrated at the end of the month of Porasu i.e. in December–January, or at the beginning of the month of Megh i.e. in January–February. The main reason behind the celebration of the festival is to offer offerings of fresh pulses and other grains to the ancestors. Since each village celebrates this festival on different dates, there is no fixed date for celebrating the festival. But three days of fasting on Monday, Wednesday and Friday are observed in all villages.

Methods of Celebration
The wife of the Pahan plays an important role in the festival. She is entrusted with the task of bathing, fasting and preparing the offerings for about three or four days before the festival. The tribal group next performs the Hawwa. Three days before the festival, at dusk, a big drum is beaten in front of the Pahan's house. When the drum beats, the young men and women of the village gather at a certain place and go around the village, dancing and singing. They move from the east side to the north side, move against the Kolakwais and re-enter the village from the east side. The Pahans make preparations for the sacrifices performed during the festival well in advance of the celebrations. Three days before the festival, cow dung and saplings or branches of the sal tree are collected from the forest by the village youth. The Pahan at the chosen site prepares three leaf cups and plates. He then addresses the villagers and bows before the three cups, offering the ritual rice wine to the ancestors. The remaining rice wine is then consumed by the Pahan, his family members and the youth who have brought sal branches from the forest.

The rituals are followed by dancing all night and all the dancers are offered a cup of rice wine. During the ritual, a chicken is sacrificed and its blood is poured onto three piles of rice placed in front of it. Three pieces of bread are offered to the piles of rice and a wrap of ritual wine is offered. The feast marks the end of the sacrifice. The Pahan next departs for his home, followed by his assistant and the villagers singing the Hawwa song. The Pahan then cooks the rice and the sacrificed chicken in a new earthen pot and takes it to the place where he has planted a branch of a sal tree that has grown on its own. Meat and rice liquor are first served before three heaps of rice, and water is sprinkled on it. The pahan then cooks the rice and the sacrificed chickens in a new earthen pot and takes it to the place where he has planted a branch of a self-grown sal tree. Meat and rice liquor are first served before three heaps of rice,

After the pahan announces that the yagya is over, the Mundas indulge in feasting and drinking. The pahan boils some rice in a stove kept there, hands it over to his wife, and offers it to their family ancestors. This ritual is marked by dancing and singing hawa songs.

Quotes




अगर अपकी भाषा की पहचान कला, संगीत और साहित्य से न होकर केवल अलग लिपि होने के कारण होती है, वो भी दिकुओं के लिपि को देख-देख कर बनाई गई लिपि से, तो ये वाकई शर्म की बात है। मुंडारी को देखिये, बिना लिपि के भी उसकी पहचान 'हो' भाषा से भी कई अधिक है, केवल अपने साहित्य के बलबूते। राजस्थानी भाषा का साहित्य इतना तगड़ा है कि वो आठवीं अनुसूची में शामिल नहीं है, उसकी अलग लिपि नहीं है, फिर भी साहित्य अकादमी को राजस्थानी लेखकों को अनुसूचित भाषाओं जैसे ही सम्मान देना पड़ता है। ये होता है साहित्य का महत्व। जो वरांग चिति सीखते हैं, वो केवल अक्षर सीखते है, फिर किस अक्षर में कौनसा बोंगा है वो सीखते है बस। इस लिपि में साहित्य बहुत कम लिखा जाता है। जब लिपि की बात होती है, तो साहित्य मार खा जाता है, क्योंकि सारा समय लिपि सीखने में व्यर्थ हो जाता है, और तो और, इस लिपि से लेखन में इतनी सारी पेचीदगियां, त्रुटियां और दोष हैं, आदमी इसे सुधारे या साहित्य लिखे? एक इन्सान द्वारा सृजित समस्या में पूरे हो समाज को उलझाने की जरूरत नहीं।